.. -*- rst -*-

.. highlightlang:: none

Debian GNU/Linux
================

This section describes how to install groonga related deb packages on
Debian GNU/Linux. You can install them by ``apt``.

We distribute both 32-bit and 64-bit packages but we strongly
recommend a 64-bit package for server. You should use a 32-bit package
just only for tests or development. You will encounter an out of
memory error with a 32-bit package even if you just process medium
size data.

.. include:: server-use.inc

squeeze
-------

Add the groonga apt repository.

/etc/apt/sources.list.d/groonga.list::

  deb http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ squeeze main
  deb-src http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ squeeze main

Install::

  % sudo aptitude update
  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y --allow-untrusted install groonga-keyring
  % sudo aptitude update
  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga

If you want to use `MeCab <http://mecab.sourceforge.net/>`_ as a
tokenizer, install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package.

Install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-tokenizer-mecab

There is a package that provides `Munin
<http://munin-monitoring.org/>`_ plugins. If you want to monitor
groonga status by Munin, install groonga-munin-plugins package.

Install groonga-munin-plugins package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-munin-plugins

There is a package that provides MySQL compatible normalizer as
groonga plugins.
If you want to use that one, install groonga-normalizer-mysql package.

Install groonga-normalizer-mysql package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-normalizer-mysql

wheezy
------

Add the groonga apt repository.

/etc/apt/sources.list.d/groonga.list::

  deb http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ wheezy main
  deb-src http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ wheezy main

Install::

  % sudo apt-get update
  % sudo apt-get -y --allow-unauthenticated install groonga-keyring
  % sudo apt-get update
  % sudo apt-get -y install groonga

If you want to use `MeCab <http://mecab.sourceforge.net/>`_ as a
tokenizer, install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package.

Install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-tokenizer-mecab

There is a package that provides `Munin
<http://munin-monitoring.org/>`_ plugins. If you want to monitor
groonga status by Munin, install groonga-munin-plugins package.

Install groonga-munin-plugins package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-munin-plugins

There is a package that provides MySQL compatible normalizer as
groonga plugins.
If you want to use that one, install groonga-normalizer-mysql package.

Install groonga-normalizer-mysql package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-normalizer-mysql

jessie
------

Add the groonga apt repository.

/etc/apt/sources.list.d/groonga.list::

  deb http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ jessie main
  deb-src http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ jessie main

Install::

  % sudo apt-get update
  % sudo apt-get -y --allow-unauthenticated install groonga-keyring
  % sudo apt-get update
  % sudo apt-get -y install groonga

If you want to use `MeCab <http://mecab.sourceforge.net/>`_ as a
tokenizer, install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package.

Install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-tokenizer-mecab

There is a package that provides `Munin
<http://munin-monitoring.org/>`_ plugins. If you want to monitor
groonga status by Munin, install groonga-munin-plugins package.

Install groonga-munin-plugins package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-munin-plugins

There is a package that provides MySQL compatible normalizer as
groonga plugins.
If you want to use that one, install groonga-normalizer-mysql package.

Install groonga-normalizer-mysql package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-normalizer-mysql

sid
---

Add the groonga apt repository.

/etc/apt/sources.list.d/groonga.list::

  deb http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ unstable main
  deb-src http://packages.groonga.org/debian/ unstable main

Install::

  % sudo aptitude update
  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y --allow-untrusted install groonga-keyring
  % sudo aptitude update
  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga

If you want to use `MeCab <http://mecab.sourceforge.net/>`_ as a
tokenizer, install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package.

Install groonga-tokenizer-mecab package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-tokenizer-mecab

There is a package that provides `Munin
<http://munin-monitoring.org/>`_ plugins. If you want to monitor
groonga status by Munin, install groonga-munin-plugins package.

Install groonga-munin-plugins package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-munin-plugins

There is a package that provides MySQL compatible normalizer as
groonga plugins.
If you want to use that one, install groonga-normalizer-mysql package.

Install groonga-normalizer-mysql package::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install groonga-normalizer-mysql

Build from source
-----------------

Install required packages to build groonga::

  % sudo aptitude -V -D -y install wget tar build-essential zlib1g-dev liblzo2-dev libmsgpack-dev libzmq-dev libevent-dev libmecab-dev

Download source::

  % wget http://packages.groonga.org/source/groonga/groonga-3.0.5.tar.gz
  % tar xvzf groonga-3.0.5.tar.gz
  % cd groonga-3.0.5

Configure (see :ref:`source-configure` about ``configure`` options)::

  % ./configure

Build::

  % make -j$(grep '^processor' /proc/cpuinfo | wc -l)

Install::

  % sudo make install
